lookup join first draft (#123719)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/query-languages/esql/esql-commands.md

Reviewer: This is a good start! I think we should also provide a description + examples to highlight how LOOKUP JOIN deals with multiple matching lookup rows for a given row from the main index.

* [`GROK`](#esql-grok)
* [`KEEP`](#esql-keep)
* [`LIMIT`](#esql-limit)

> * [`LOOKUP JOIN`](#esql-lookup-join)

Reviewer: I think this needs to be marked as tech preview, similar to `MV_EXPAND`.

| LIMIT 5
```

## `LOOKUP JOIN` [esql-lookup-join]

`LOOKUP JOIN` is useful for any scenario where you need to pull in information from a lookup index to streamline data enrichment and analysis.

**Syntax**

```esql
FROM firewall_logs
| LOOKUP JOIN threat_list ON source.IP
```

**Parameters**

TBD

**Description**

TBD

**Examples**

**IP Threat correlation**: This query would allow you to see if any source IPs match known malicious addresses.

```esql
FROM firewall_logs

> | LOOKUP JOIN threat_list ON source.IP

Reviewer: super-nit: to truly match the example description, maybe it'd be useful to add something like
```
| WHERE threat_level IS NOT NULL
```
We do perform a lookup in the threat list, but we don't do anything with the result. Checking for a field from the `threat_list` to be not null implies that the `source.IP` was actually in the threat_list in the first place. LOOKUP JOIN doesn't automatically discard rows that have no match in the lookup index. (The latter behavior would be an INNER JOIN, while LOOKUP JOIN behaves like a LEFT OUTER JOIN.)

Author: do we want to specify this clear guidance of how lookup join works .. as a left outer join. I think this would probably be beneficial to folks if it does mimic that. We can use common language to explain.. for instance

`LOOKUP JOIN` works similar to a LEFT OUTER join in SQL. It will provide all the rows from the input table and if there is matching data in the lookup index that will be provided as well. If there is no match, the rows from the input table will still be provided and any missing data will be returned as `null`. I am not sure if this is accurately explaining it so please keep me honest. But that is how left outer joins work.

```

> **Host metadata correctlation**: This query pulls in environment or ownership details for each host to correlate your metrics data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Host metadata correlation**: This query pulls in environment or ownership details for each host to correlate with your metrics data.
```

```esql
FROM system_metrics
| LOOKUP JOIN host_inventory ON host.name
| LOOKUP JOIN employees ON host.name
```

**Service ownership mapping**: This query would show logs with the owning team or escalation information for faster triage and incident response.

```esql
FROM app_logs
| LOOKUP JOIN service_owners ON service_id
```

> In case of name collisions, the newly created columns will override existing columns.

Reviewer: We should also provide examples of this.

| LIMIT 5
```

## `LOOKUP JOIN` [esql-lookup-join]

`LOOKUP JOIN` is useful for any scenario where you need to pull in information from a lookup index to streamline data enrichment and analysis.

**Syntax**

```esql
FROM firewall_logs
| LOOKUP JOIN threat_list ON source.IP
| WHERE threat_level IS NOT NULL
```

**Parameters**

> TBD

Reviewer: This doesn't look right. The command has only 2 parameters right now, the lookup index and the join key field.

The source index is actually just whatever would previously be returned by the query up until the `LOOKUP JOIN`. Which may not even be an index, it can consist solely of computed fields, like after a `STATS` command.

> TBD

Reviewer: Also:
> Cannot be a multi-valued field.
It can absolutely be multi-valued, but multi-values in this field will not match anything in the lookup index. And multi-values in the lookup index' join key will also not lead to matches. The other way round, only single values lead to matches, otherwise all the added fields from the lookup index will just contain `null` for that row.

> TBD

Reviewer 2: 🙈 yeah that source_index crept in somehow 😄 

edited suggestion with that info, thanks!
